there are 39 million people in the world
who were blind 80% of them are living in
low-income countries such as Kenya and
the absolute majority do not need to be
blind
they are blind from diseases that are
either completely curable or preventable
known this with my young family we moved
to Kenya we secured equipment funds
vehicles we trained a team we set up a
hundred clinics throughout the Great
Rift Valley to try and understand a
single question why are people going
blind
and what can we do the challenges were
great when we got to where we were going
we set up our high-tech equipment power
was rarely available but after on our
equipment from petrol power generators
and then something occurred to me there
has to be an easier way because it's the
patients who are the most in need of
access to eye care who are the least
likely to get it more people in Kenya
and in sub-saharan Africa have access to
a mobile phone than they do clean
running water so we said could we
harness the power of mobile technology
to deliver eye care in a new way and so
we developed peak a smart phone that
enables community health care workers
and empowers them to deliver eye care
everywhere we set about replacing
traditional hospital equipment which is
bulky expensive and fragile with
smartphone apps and hardware that make
it possible to test anyone in any
language under any age here we have a
demonstration of a three-month-old
having their vision accurately tested
using an app in an eye tracker
we've got many trials going on in the
community and in schools and through the
lessons that we've learned in the field
we've realized it's extremely important
to share the data in non-medical jargon
so that people understand what we're
examining on what that means to them so
here for example we use our site sim
application once your vision has been
measured to show carers and teachers
what the visual world is like for that
person so they can empathize with them
and help them once we've discovered
somebody has low vision the next big
challenge is to work out why and to be
able to do that we need to have access
to the inside of the eye traditionally
this requires expensive equipment to
examine an area called the retina the
retina is the single part of the eye
that has huge amounts of information
about the body and its health we've
developed 3d printed low-cost hardware
that comes in at less than five dollars
to produce which can then be clipped
onto a smartphone and makes it possible
to get views of the back of the eye of a
very high quality and the beauty is
anybody can do it in our trials on over
two-and-a-half thousand people the
smartphone with the Adhan clip is
comparable to a camera that is hugely
more expensive and hugely more difficult
to transport when we first moved to
Kenya we went with 150,000 dollars of
equipment a team of 15 people and that
was needed to deliver healthcare now all
that's needed is a single person on a
bike with a smartphone and it costs just
five hundred dollars the issue of power
supply is overcome by harnessing the
power of solar our health care workers
travel with a solar-powered rucksack
which keeps the phone charged and backed
up now we go to the patient rather than
waiting for the patient never to come we
go to them in their homes and we give
them the most comprehensive high-tech
accurate examination which can be
delivered by anyone with minimal
training we can link global experts with
people in the most rural
difficult to reach places there beyond
the end of the road effectively putting
those experts in their homes allowing us
to make diagnosis and make plans for
treatment project managers hospital
directors are able to search an or
interface by any parameter they may be
interested in here Nakuru where I've
been living we can search for people by
whatever condition here people who are
blind from a curable condition cataract
each red pin depicts somebody who is
blind from a diseases curable and
treatable and their locatable we can use
bulk text messaging services to explain
that we're coming to arrange treatment
what's more we've learned that this is
something that we haven't built just for
the community but with the community
those blue pins that drop represent
elders or local leaders that are
connected to those people who can ensure
that we can find them in a range
treatment so for patients like Mama one
Gauri who've been blind for over ten
years and never seen her grandchildren
for less than $40 we can restore her
eyesight this is something that has to
happen it's only in statistics that
people go blind by their Millions
the reality is everyone goes blind on
their own but now they might just be a
text message away from help
and now because live demos are always a
bad idea we're gonna try a live demo so
here we have the peak vision app
okay and what we're looking at here this
is Sam's optic nerve which is a direct
extension of her brain so I'm actually
looking at her brain as we look there we
can see all parts of the retina it makes
it possible to pick up diseases of the
eye and of the body that would not be
possible without access to the eye and
that clip-on device can be manufactured
for just a few dollars and people can be
cured of blindness and I think it says a
lot about us as a human race if we've
developed cures and we don't deliver
them but now we can thank you